# How data science and other digital technologies can help in contact tracking covid-19 cases?

Countries around the world are handling covid-19 pandemic in variety of different ways. Some of them are proactive and others more reactive. However, the successful are the ones who are proactive in doing comprehensive, in-depth and early contact tracking and investigation of each and every probable case. This allowed them to find and quarantine people that might have exposed to the covid-19.  South Korea and Singapore are the examples where comprehensive tracking and surveillance is proving very effective tool in reducing the spread of covid-19. 

Rigorous, and complete tracking and tracing of the covid-19 detected and probable cases is critical in knowing who else might be affected that helps the authorities and decision makers to direct operational efforts to stop the spread of covid-19. Data science, machine learning, AI and other digital technologies can help tremendously in tracking not only the potentially affected people but surfaces that might be exposed to the covid-19. 

Let’s take New Zealand as an example. In New Zealand, if a covid-19 case is detected, all close contacts of that person including family members and friends are contacted and asked to self-quarantine. Also, if the detected person travelled from overseas, people setting in the close proximity of this person in the plane are also asked to self-quarantine for 14 days. Most of it is based on the information given by the detected person.  This is good and should be done. However, everyday news cases are being reported and some of them are from unknown links or source, that is an evidence that there are blind spots in current tracking system. 
 
 ![NZ tracking has blind spots]https://github.com/Dr-MunirShah/covid-19/blob/master/NZ%20tracking%20has%20blind%20spots.png)
 
Current tracking system in New Zealand might be missing significant segments of population who might be exposed to covid-19 via the detected person. For example (Figure 1), if you look at the journey of an example effected person, say this person came from overseas, the segment of population exposed includes:  fellow passengers exposed in the flight, staff at airport, taxi driver from airport to home, might have visited a local pub or restaurant,  family members or co-habitants etc. Current tracking system will have quite a lot of blind spots such as visit to the local restaurant, or petrol station, grocery store, public toilets etc. 

Data science, big-data and machine learning technologies could offer tremendous help in not only tracking the directly exposed people to the detected cases, but to precisely locate the exposed surfaces. Tracking exposed surfaces is important as there are numerous reports that covid-19 could stay alive on the surface from few hours to days depending on the type of the surface. 

Singapore gave a new meaning to disease detectives, they mobilized cops & a network of thousands of public cameras to retrace the footsteps of patients, hunting down those they were in contact with. Although we in New Zealand, might not have widespread camera surveillance, these days almost everybody (over 99% adults in New Zealand) carry their cell-phones around with them and cell-phone location data is collected by the telecom and mobile service providers for their operational purposes (Vodafone, Spark and 2 degrees in NZ). From my previously experience working with this type of data I know this rich and real-time data source has huge potential in tracking places and people on the paths and locations where detected patients have been in last two weeks. Other potential data sources are tripe planes from Google maps, and social media such as location information from the Facebook and Twitter. 

How it might work? We should be able to generate journey path for a covid-19 positive or probable cases individually with detailed timelines. Say a person A was at the restaurant X at 7:00 pm on 10/03/2020. We should be able to find out all other cell phones (as proxy to the people) present at the restaurant X for 24 hours after 7:00pm on that date. Similarly, a detailed map of all other places and people that might be exposed to covid-19 via this case should be created and followed up. 

I understand that in the normal times this type of data is highly private and confidential should not be release for any other purpose. However, as Sir David Skegg mentioned in his article (NZ’s Covid response: We need to be more open), New Zealand like rest of the world is facing an unprecedented challenge that require urgent decisions now. Rapid case contact tracing could be expanded quickly and enhanced using data science and other digital technologies. Considering the potential of this data saving not only lives but potential economics damage, I am sure for the benefit of the whole community, people and companies will be willing to cooperate. Take action now otherwise it will be too late. 
